detective recap here today i'm going to
explain a docudrama thriller film called
stanford prison experiment which is
based on a true story
spoilers ahead watch out and take care
stanford university posted an
advertisement asking for male college
students who will participate in a
psychological study of prison life
they're paying 15 a day for one to two
weeks the study is called the stanford
prison experiment
after assessing the potential candidates
emotional state and inclination for
aggression the researchers use a coin
flip to decide on whether the
participant will be a guard or a
prisoner
an orientation is then held for the
guard group the superintendent dr phil
zimbardo introduces himself as a
psychology professor at stanford
university
the experiment is part of his research
on the effects prisons have on human
behavior and he explains that they will
be using stanford's faculty offices as
prison cells
a hallway will serve as the prison yard
after reminding them that attacking
prisoners is prohibited he gives the men
sunglasses and uniforms to give the
prisoners the impression that they have
a singular unit of authority
from this point on there to take the
study seriously never referred to it as
an experiment again
day one of the stanford prison
experiment has begun in an office
dr zimbardo and his graduate staff mike
kyle
and paul watch the experiment unfold
through a surveillance television
a man comes into the room and dr
zimbardo introduces him as jesse
fletcher who they'll be consulting with
throughout the study
a guard takes one of the prisoners named
daniel to a mirror
there daniel sees that he's wearing a
nude cap and a dress the guard tells him
that from now on
he will be known as prisoner8612 and
that he will refer to them as
correctional
officers daniel tries to stay casual
about it but the guard sternly
straightens him out before immutably
taking him to a cell
daniel jeff and peter share a cell and
the three of them are talking when the
guard calls them to line up
all the prisoners line up in the hall
while the guard lays down all their
rules
in the surveillance office mike is
getting ready for his role as the warden
dr zimbardo asks him to tell the guards
to lighten up but fletcher advises
against it
during meal time prisoner 5704 asks a
guard for a smoke
so he gives him a cigarette but before
the prisoner could smoke christopher
takes the cigarette from him and smokes
it himself
with a tough guy act and a phony
southern accent he casually tells the
prisoner that smoking is a privilege he
has to earn
though the prisoner tries to reason that
the contract allows them to smoke
christopher doesn't hear them out
he goes to the prisoner's table to warn
them that he doesn't want any more
talking
daniel tries to joke about how he thinks
he's john wayne but suddenly
christopher slams his baton against the
table and coldly singles daniel out
for the prisoner's next activity
christopher has them all lined up and
makes them say their prisoner number
which he calls their names
loud and clear each time someone isn't
loud fast
or clear or whenever someone messes up
or looks down to check their number
they have to start over again eventually
he makes some prisoners recite other
prisoners numbers
and when they're unable to christopher
orders them to do push-ups
afterwards christopher asks if everyone
enjoyed their counts and daniel crossley
replies that he didn't
in response christopher has the guards
forcefully taken to the hole
which is a dark small and confining
closet in the guard's rooms
some of the guards laugh at
christopher's power tripping while some
look uncomfortable about it
one of them asks if the prisoners just
do as he says and christopher
who's dropped his southern accent
happily tells him that they do amused
the guard muses about giving daniel
extra attention that night
while the prisoners are sleeping the
guards suddenly wake them up and make
them go to the hall to put their hands
on the wall
the guard announces that it's exercise
period and he makes them do 40 push-ups
and jumping jacks
though the prisoners are clearly
agitated and worn out they comply
when peter finishes he stands up
stone-faced as he insists that he's
already done
the guard orders everyone to keep doing
their push-ups until peter joins them
peter spitefully yields but not without
calling the guard a fascist pig
affronted the guard aggressively orders
his fellow guards to put peter in the
hole
the prisoners are instructed to make
their beds while the guard followed
through on what he said about giving a
very jittery daniel extra attention
he asks him if he made his bed and when
daniel said he did the guard ruins it
telling him that he didn't
daniel snaps and he grabs the guard to
slam him against the wall
without warning he hits daniel's face
with his baton spurring unease from the
guards and prisoners alike
realizing that he broke protocol the
guard frantically starts commanding the
others to put daniel in the hole
there daniel talks about how it felt
good to fight back when peter expresses
his reluctance
daniel convinces him to help get the
other prisoners on their side
there are only three guards at a given
time while there are nine prisoners
daniel thinks that the odds are in their
favor it's day two of the stanford
prison experiment and the prisoners are
eating
there's an oppressive error around them
and they all look on edge prisoner 5486
looks particularly stressed
and he doesn't move when the guard
instructs them to wash their plates and
head back
when questioned he hesitantly asserts
that he's not going until he gets his
glasses
the guard makes the others get him but
since 5486 wouldn't budge
he roughly grabs him and drags him to
the hole finally the researchers wake dr
zimbardo up to show him the footage
zimbardo seems intrigued by this and
when kyle asks if they should step in
zimbardo tells them to see where it goes
though kyle reasons that things are
taking a turn for the worse
zimbardo remains unmoved finally the
prisoners are let out of the hole and
peter discovers that he has a new cell
assignment
with his two cellmates feeling desperate
for cigarettes and vitamins peter tells
them about what he and daniel talked
about in the hole
when the guards come to check on them
again they see that peter's cell is
barred while their prisoner number
patches are all cut up in front of their
cell upon noticing this
daniel starts calling out in support of
peter's revolution
the guards report the incident to
zimbardo but the professor chides them
for losing order in his prison he
reminds them that they have all the
authority and that they're stronger than
the prisoners
since the prisoners are forming bonds
with each other zimbardo slyly tells the
guards to break them up
before leaving he adds that they should
call for backup if they need to
when the guards return there are several
more of them and they forcibly take all
the prisoners beds away from them
danielle and his cellmates try to resist
but the prisoners from cell 3 are more
compliant
upsetting daniel while the other
researchers grow uncomfortable as they
watch
zimbardo looks amused and satisfied with
the outcome a guard instructs jeff to
put his cap back on
but jeff is adamant about disobeying him
as a result the guards get him down to
tie him up
after everything the guards have given
the members of cell 3 a decent meal
complete with soda and sandwiches
right in the middle of the hallway they
even give 5486's glasses back
using the three men the guards make an
example to show what good behavior will
get the prisoners there
back in his cell daniel uses a screw to
get the doors locked off
he and 7258 make a run for it and they
even manage to pass the guard's quarters
catching a guard's attention
the two make it to the exit only to find
that every door in the hall is locked
in no time at all both the guards and
the researchers arrive and the guards
capture daniel in 7258
forcing them to face the wall the guards
are ripping daniel and seven two five
eight stresses off while the two are
begging them to stop
with the two men naked now the guard
shoved daniel back in the hole for being
a terrible influence on all the other
prisoners
while peter is forced to stay in a
different cell with a still tied up jeff
later christopher visits peter's cell
and uses a fire extinguisher on the men
overwhelming them and allowing the
guards to finally open their door in the
hole
daniel is growing more and more
unraveled he desperately screams about
needing a doctor
the warden or someone even yelling about
how messed up he feels inside
desperate he shrieks that he's burning
up inside then begs repeatedly to be let
out while the guards and prisoners could
only listen
later daniel is sat on a chair in front
of fletcher and all the researchers
he weakly stammers about having a
stomach ache and a headache so fletcher
yells out
calling crap on what he's saying when
fletcher says that he's weak
not sick daniel tries telling him that
he doesn't know what it's like there
this sets fletcher off and he storms
over to daniel asking him if he has the
right to tell someone who served 17
years of hard time that he doesn't know
what he's like to be there
daniel grows meek and after fletcher
finishes antagonizing him
zimbardo asks daniel what the real
problem is on the verge of tears
he says that the guards are going
overboard to which zimbardo retorts that
he brought that upon himself
finally daniel admits that he wants to
get out of there and zimbardo simply
recommends that he fight less so he
wouldn't be so tired
daniel tries to get a word in but
zimbardo sharply tells him not to
interrupt him daniel timothy apologizes
and zimbardo subtly berates him for not
being able to handle some push-ups and
some guys calling him names
still he says that he'll ask the guards
to go easy on him and with that the
guards take daniel away
as the researchers go mike asks simbardo
if he'll really tell the guards to go
easy on him and zimbardo rejects the
very idea
claiming that daniel was faking when
daniel's made to line up with the other
prisoners
he goes on a heated tirade about how
this is all real and that this isn't an
experiment
he yells when the guards try touching
him then storms off to the camera to
yell at it
he curses the researchers out repeatedly
shouting that they have no right to
screw with his head while mike and kyle
watch the hysterical man threaten to
beat up everyone
day three comes and mike and kyle
explained to zimbardo that they had to
let daniel go last night
this anger zimbardo and though kyle
tries reasoning that the contract allows
them to leave
zimbardo doesn't hear him out
incredulous he asks them all if they
understand how much time and resources
were spent just for them to tamper with
the integrity of the enterprise
he only calms down when mike reveals
that daniel wanted a lawyer and zimbardo
is left to wonder what they missed in
the screening process
as an argument brews about what happened
zimbardo calmly interjects that the
point of the matter is
the only thing separating a prisoner
like daniel and a guard like christopher
was a coin flip
later in the surveillance room kyle
calls zimbardo and plays the tape from
jeff in 7258 cell
they talk about daniel and 7258 insist
that he's sure that daniel's home and
not in maximum security like the guards
claim he is
he says that the breakdown was some jive
acting and that daniel will be back
because they made a deal that if either
of them makes it out they'll bust the
others out
zimbardo is surprised to hear this but
mike calls his attention to let him know
that the prisoner's visitors are there
after visiting hours zimbardo approaches
his colleagues and instructs them to up
the security tonight
when they don't seem enthusiastic about
it he reminds them of daniel's plan to
bust everyone else out
though they recommend zimbardo to rest
tonight he rudely insists on sitting
guard
while zimbardo's on guard duty a
co-professor politely questions him
about his methods and variables but this
only offends zimbardo who cuts their
conversation short
later when he goes to the office mike
informs him that kyle's gone because he
had a death in the family
zimbardo curses about how they could not
have come at a worse time troubling mike
by day four peter starts to crack
thinking that he can't last another
night there
when it's meal time peter stays in his
cell and when his request to see a
doctor is ignored
he screams into a pillow and starts
ripping into it later a priest speaks
with each of the prisoners while
zimbardo takes notes during their
exchange
when it's peter's turn to be called the
guards see that he's made a mess of the
pillow feathers in his cell
the priest asks if peter's contacted a
lawyer and peter says that he has an
uncle who's a lawyer so the priest
encourages him to call
meanwhile a guard makes all the
prisoners chant that peter or prisoner
819 did a bad thing loudly and
repeatedly so peter could hear them from
the room where he and the priest spoke
in
with the incessant chanting peter starts
screaming his hands clutching at his
head
peter is in tears as he wails over how
he isn't a bad prisoner forcing zimbardo
to let him leave
back in the hallway mike demands to know
why zimbardo did that and zimbardo makes
it clear that he can't handle any more
talk involving lawyers
during day five zimbardo's girlfriend dr
christina moslick heads to the
surveillance room
she and zimbardo share a kiss and she
volunteers to take kyle's place on the
parole board
during meal time a new prisoner has
joined them prisoner 416 has lost his
appetite from the bucket of feces nearby
so when a guard tells him to eat he
politely refuses
as a result he gets put in the hole the
guard drops his plate there
makes him pick the sausages up and tells
him that he's not leaving until he eats
the sausages
in a meeting with the researchers jeff
meekley requests for parole so he can
spend his 23rd birthday with his friends
as it's his last year at stanford
he even pretends that the prison is
treating him well in turn
fletcher berates him antagonizes him
over imaginary charges and uses said
charges to paint a picture of him being
unfit to take part in regular society
zimbardo joins in egging jeff on until
he's brought to tears and zimbardo has
him taken away
but before he leaves christina who's
been watching everything unfold with a
perturbed expression
asks if he'll give up his prison salary
in exchange for parole and jeff
wholeheartedly says he would
during their meeting mike points out
that jeff looks ready to break but
zimbardo refuses to grant him the parole
since it would show the other prisoners
that they just need to do some talking
to be let go
when he asks fletcher for his opinion
fletcher says that he just reenacted
everything that was done to them
suddenly he seems choked up so he leaves
the room with zimbardo following him
at that point fletcher wants out he
hates himself now
he became everything he hated and he
enjoyed it zimbardo asks him to stay and
with a pleading look on his face
fletcher requests jeff to be paroled for
him with a tight smile zimbardo agrees
christopher turns up for his shift and
as he's walking down the hall he sees
paul taking jeff
out after wearing a look of annoyance he
goes to the guard's quarters and tells
his colleagues to make it a night to
remember
they open up the hole to antagonize 416
who still hasn't eaten his sausages
finally 416 tells him that no one there
is treating the prisoners like human
beings and the guards and experimenters
are violating the rules set up for the
experiment
after 416 declared that he won't endorse
an unfair system christopher makes a
show of losing it
he yells at him asking if he expected to
be taken to nursery school after
breaking the law
slamming the door shut he shouts that
he's not going anywhere until he eats
the sausages
and his fellow guard laughs as they walk
away as christina is about to enter the
elevator
she sees the guards with christopher in
the lead marching the prisoners to their
respective buckets for bathroom time
all while the inmates have bags over
their heads though she looks perturbed
by the cruel treatment
zimbardo smiles at her asking her how
incredible this is without a word
christina leaves and zimbardo chases
after her when he asks her what's wrong
christina finally confronts him about
how messed up the study is and how
they're dealing with kids who never
committed a crime in their lives
she reminds him that all of them begged
to leave and when she wondered what
they're so afraid of
she realized that they're afraid of
zimbardo affronted zimbardo retorts that
she's not looking at this like a
psychologist and that she's not going to
cut it in their field if she's going to
get so emotional over some basic
procedure
when christina gets offended zimbardo
tries to tell her that she of all people
should understand what he tapped into in
his prison incredulous christina calls
him out for being so in over his head
that he's calling this his prison
she stresses that he's not dealing with
prisoners subjects or students
but boys boys that he's harming so he
needs to fix his mess now
after everything zimbardo just
definitely asks her if she's finished
and when christina walks away zimbardo
doesn't stop her
with that he hurtly returns to watch
what's happening and he finds the guards
doubling down on tormenting the
prisoners
christopher makes seven two five eight
and two zero nine three pretend to be
frankenstein and the bride of
frankenstein
and when seven two five eight's forced
to get close and tell 2-0-9-3 he loves
him
he almost cries then christopher quietly
asks 2-0-9-3 why he's such an obedient
but kissing homeless boy before getting
the hole open to reveal a still quietly
resistant 4-1-6
he makes 2-0-9-3 crassly tell 4-1-6 that
he's going to beat him up but 2-0-9-3
finally objects
not wanting to speak profanities being
the more reluctant of the three
the blonde guard advises 2-0-9-3 to just
tell 4-1-6 that he'll kick him in his
end and 2-0-9-3 readily approaches 4-1-6
to comply
unsatisfied christopher and the ponytail
guard torment 2-0-9-3 for not meaning
what he said while the blonde guard has
had enough of everything and moves away
from them
christopher's unwilling to let 2-0-9-3
go so he backs him against a wall
continually forcing him to say a bad
word despite all the yelling
the insults and the fear-mongering
2-0-9-3 remain subservient while firmly
refuses to use profane language no
matter what christopher tries to do
left with no other options christopher
holds the other prisoners hostage
casually telling them that they're not
getting any sleep until 2093 says what
he wants him to say
eventually 2-0-9-3 meets him halfway
with a resolved yet uncomfortable
expression he mentions the profane word
but only while declaring that he shall
not say it with any meaning
smug and satisfied christopher punishes
2093 for swearing and orders him to do
10 push-ups which 2-0-9-3 thanks him for
before getting to it
the ponytail guard places his foot on
2-0-9-3's back telling him to start his
push-ups over again
but christopher has a better idea he
makes five seven zero four and four
three two five sit on two zero nine
three's back
with the insurmountable load on his back
2-0-9-3 tries to do one push-up but he
breaks
falling on the floor and sobbing all the
while zimbardo watches intently with an
increasingly perturbed expression as if
realizing what a mess everything is
then christopher has the prisoners line
up again calling them male and female
camels and making them hump each other
to show 2093 how to mate
unable to refuse their order the
prisoners hump their fellow prisoners
with a blank look
while prisoner 416 sings the amazing
grace after being forced by christopher
while the guard's reign of terror
continues zimbardo could only stew in
horror and regret after seeing what he's
done and encouraged
finally he steps out of the office and
into the hall where he yells at the
guards to catch their attention
when they all look at him zimbardo
weekly says that the experiment is over
terminated
he almost looks like he's going to cry
when he has to repeat it and after the
prisoners stare blankly at him they
finally start showing relief
as for christopher he breaks out of
character at the flip of a switch then
asks if they're not getting paid for the
full two weeks
the stanford prisoner experiment was
terminated on august 20th 1971
after only six days two months later the
guards and prisoners were interviewed
a guard stated that it was easy to say
that you wouldn't have acted like he did
but you wouldn't know now he knows what
he's capable of and it hurts him
daniel and christopher also share an
interview and daniel still looks shaken
up
he claims that the whole experience
continues to harm him and he remains
troubled that people could be as vile as
their guards were
he knows that christopher's a nice guy
but he hates him because he knows what
he can turn into
in turn christopher says that he didn't
see what he was doing as harmful
it was degrading but it was part of his
own personal experiment to see what kind
of verbal abuse people can take before
objecting
he started to abuse everyone so much he
got so profane but people never said a
thing
as a result of the experiment dr phil
zimbardo shifted his focus to educating
others about the psychology of authority
and the abuse of power
subscribe to watch more videos like this
turn on notifications
and leave a like it really helps the
channel out thank you for watching